Okay, the tape is on. So we'll act straight and all that. Okay, also ever
present in the series is the bondage. I mean, you've got the physical bondage of
Estri, but you've also got the, I guess, metaphoric bondage of the whole planet,
that sort of thing. What was the, was that just Estri's fate? I mean, that's
when she lived and that's the breaks, folks? Well, we're all stuck in this
physical body. And were also, what was, I think, annoying me most was the
limitations of logic. That was the bondage that was bothering me at the time. I
was fooling around with Dino's paradoxes, Ulysses and the Tortoise and the rest
of that, trying to make some determination on my own as to what was going on.
And we were throwing up our hands in that project and saying, well, you know,
there's no way. We're never, while you're in a human body and immersed in time,
there's no way you're going to be able to make any determination as to the
nature of time or the degree to which it preceded motion space, what comes
first, the chicken or the egg thing. So there's bondage on every level.
Certainly the limitations of the intellectual part of what I was talking about,
and I'm just carrying it out and being consistent. The female and male bondage,
equally, really, for those characters. They were tremendously limited by their
genetic sexuality. So I meant it that way, too. And fooling around with the
trying to show people that it's fun. There's an element in young girls which
makes rape fantasies attractive. And the reality is not in any way attractive.
Trying to point that difference out. that it's not nice if it happens to you.
That's another reason I did the first book, particularly First Person. Violence
is not fun. If you've ever been in a difficult or violent situation or ever been
tied up or attacked by hospitals or any of the above, you find that it is an
altered state in which you are not happy to be. And some of that, indeed, was
from experience. We got into a lot of dicey situations during our New York time
and the time that we were underground. And my husband was a federal fugitive,
and life was tough. So there are the bondages on every level. But I think for me
it was the intellectual bondage combined with the internal bondage of a person
to their own sexuality, whichever sex or sort of subset of sex that we have now,
so many open groups of people who are changing sex or choosing to copulate with
the same sex or whatever they want to do, everybody is stuck within the bondage
of their genetic conditioning, whatever it happens to be. I mean, you don't see
too many people that have transcended on any level what their genes are allowing
them to do and what their physical body is allowing them to do. As we said
before, I just haven't reached God status yet. It's very frustrating. The Wind
from the Abyss was one of the most frustrating books I've ever read. And by
frustrating, I mean I was really pulling for Estri and here she was, this kind
of cute little sorority girl again with no brain and no abilities. And I've read
that. I think Tanith Lee does a good job with that chapters at a time, but this
was the whole book, or at least a good part of the book, and so that's something
I really enjoyed, was that frustration that, you know, I wish she'd hurry up and
break out of it so we can get on, and that was very interesting. That was quite
a good job of writing. Well, I was really trying to make it real and give them
something that can bring back to this world of news, you know, part of the
reason that you abstract so far, and the reason I had them have no awareness of
our culture and our science and our mores, was so that what is useful and what
is, in a sense, universal will stand out better. I mean, that's another, that's
the value of fantasy if it's done well, is what is not armed is very familiar.
I'm glad you enjoyed that. Very much so. I got to ask this question, where are
we in We Earthlings 1983 during Silistra? Are these humans that have descended
from us, or have these preceded us, or what? What's your idea on that? They're
over there having all this right now while we're over here stuck by ourselves.
That's my feeling about it, that it's all right now out there somewhere, and
that we're just not, you know, we're just in the big terms, if you consider, you
know, the distances involved, and I'm sure you know this, we've only been
civilized for a minute. So nobody would have found us yet if there's something
out there. So it could all be going on exactly now, and we just aren't a part of
it. What would our compatibility index be with the Silistrans? Oh, dear. Well,
let's say just for the sake of being positive, pretty good. I would think it
wouldn't be too bad. I mean, the chances of you fathering a child on a
Silistran woman. Yeah. You're the interviewer. 95%. Okay. Okay.
Okay, now we come to the Kerrion saga,
whatever, Kerrion books, whatever. Once again, was this a planned series? Did
you cold-bloodedly set out to say, I'm going to write three books? Yeah, I was
cold-blooded, yeah. I was going to do three. I signed for them before I did
them. Three was all there was going to be. Three is all there is going to be.
Unless something drastically changes, then I see where it's some place that I'd
like to take it. I knew exactly where I wanted to talk about physics and the
rest of it. I wanted to create a female character that had all the flaws that
Estri did not. It was totally opposite. And to talk a little about politics, I
come from a very political background. My half-sister was Carter's speech writer
on economic policy. I know way too much about politics to suit me. And I want to
talk a little bit about politics. and decision-making at higher levels and what
indeed happens to the people involved in it and the people affected by it who
have no control of it. And the nice stuff for me that balanced it off was a
culture that was comfortable with its technology, growing into its technology,
growing along with its technology. And, I mean, for me, the Cruisers were the
main characters there. I loved doing the cruiser sections, although they were
very difficult at times, to make it really seem as if they were cruisers. And,
you know, one never knows if one succeeds, but for me they really were cruisers.
Plus, I had the whole of history to draw on. Instead of having a culture that
had nothing to do with us, I had a culture that had everything to do with us.
There had been no collapse, no World War III. Everything had preceded a pace and
just gotten worse. The problems with quantum mechanics hadn't been solved. The
problems with nothing else had been solved. And we were just sort of muddling
along the way we tend to do. And that, to me, was a lot of fun. But as I said, I
did the partial, and it went to auction in two countries on the partial. And I
was sold it here in England at the same time. Had two editors trying to keep the
volumes consistent. You know, every editor has a different idea of what exactly
they want you to do, and they all want to mix in. It's very seldom you get an
editor that leaves you totally alone. It doesn't bother you at all about a book.
And I had to split the difference on one occasion between them when one editor
wanted one section to be longer and the other one wanted the same section to be
shorter, just the same 30 pages. And I ended up doing a prologue, which seemed
to satisfy them both. I think they forgot what they asked me to do, but I had to
do something super. So I had done that.
So they were good understanding of technology. Otherwise, you're writing a
historical, a book that was meant for the 40s, which just happens to be set in
the 80s. And people aren't dealing with technology. They aren't even dealing
with the romantic end of it. No end of it whatsoever. So I'd go to these
conventions, and they'd all raise their hands and say, yes, they want more
science. And yes, they were ready to work a little. And yes, they wanted to be
challenged. And I said, OK, but we don't. And I wrote a book in which I wrote To
my ideal reader, didn't talk down, didn't simplify it, did what I consider a
good job of explaining mathematics as poetry, and just let fly. And so far, the
reaction to it's been very good. As I told you, the first printing, it's been
through two printings before publication or three, and it's been doing very
well. You get some people that don't want to work, but I think there's enough
story there to carry them over the parts that they are not willing to try to
understand. I want to take this opportunity now to look at the characters. I
kind of mentioned this on the phone the other night, but this is for the tape.
We're introduced, the first character, other than Shebat, and this is Marada,
the man. We like him at first, but then he obviously turns into a bastard. And
then Chaeron is dislikable at the first. I didn't care for him, and then he turns
likable. David Spry, I never did like. I'm not talking about the way he was
written, but the character. He just bothered me. And then in the first series,
is it Chayin? How was his name pronounced? He was a bastard at first, and then
he turned out okay. And Sereth kind of switched back and forth. So the point is
your characters do turn out to be, they seem to be one thing, and then they turn
into something else. and for one thing, most science fiction doesn't have
characters this deep, but they certainly aren't chameleons like this. How do you
do that, and what are you driving at here? Okay, well, I find that in life,
people tend to show you what they aren't at first meeting, for one thing. What
you're getting from a person in an initial meeting is what they want to project,
which is usually something that covers their faults. and very few people are on
it, so a first meeting of somebody is almost always a polar opposite. They're
covering their weaknesses. They're trying to direct you in a particular
direction as to their view of them. At times you get an impression of what they
would like to be if they're very good at it, and it disintegrates from there.
You can get less than that from people, but I find in life that you can't judge
a person at the first meeting. i knew from the Marada character initially was
meant over the period of one book to turn from an apparent good guy to a
troubled bad guy over the over the three books Chaeron was supposed to make that
same kind of transition and even Shebat who is in a sense a traditional heroine
in the first book is really an ancillary character in the third book so those
were structural things that I was doing purposely, consciously, and for fun in
those books, because I think that they say something about humanity. But I never
lied to you about any of those characters. Marada's father had a handle on both
those kids from the beginning, and he told them straight and true, exactly what
they were. The other thing that was stated in the beginning, which was
consistent, if one wanted to accept it from the reading, is that all pilots are
crazy, and anybody who becomes a pilot is going to get crazy within what the non
-pilots consider sanity and as Shabaku came closer and closer to her cruiser she
did find her relations with humans more and more tenuous Spry held back so much
information there were hints in the first book that Spry was not at all what he
seemed and what he wanted to do was very different from what it appeared to be
that he was doing, but he was the most fun of the characters to work with
because he had no pretensions of a higher morality in the term of long-term good
beyond his interaction with the other pilots, you know, what he wanted for them.
And even that was reasonably short-term. He was just a pragmatist and a mover
and shaker, the kind of guy that gets things done. An intelligence type, really,
is what he is, having known a number of them. and intelligence types tend to
behave very much like that. You really don't see them until later on. You must
have met some in your work. Oh, yes. Yeah, if you were ever going to do any more
in this milieu, I'd think a prequel featuring the old man would be interesting
because I hated to see him die off because he was really a good character,
really enjoyable. Yeah, I felt bad about that, too. I usually give a character a
choice you want to die now or you want to limp along a bit longer and with that
particular character he chose his moment he had it together and he got his
things done and he had to do
a prequel would not be a bad idea it would be fun what happened was conceptually
that I think Earth Dreams took it about as far as I would dare take it without a
lot of feedback from an audience that they were willing to go another step into
that kind of abstract thought. I did that to find out if people really, really
are willing and interested in putting in that kind of effort in a book. I don't
know. I'm going to find out. I'm going to hear back. But to take it further
would be to get very, very abstract with the concepts involved. and I would
rather back up and do a simpler one, but you've got to fulfill the things that
you say you're going to do in a book, and I couldn't leave that book without
handling the technical problems that I had created. I had to solve them or at
least explain them. Where do you get feedback? Do you go to cons, or do you just
think that the sales reflect, the sales are feedback? Well, I used to go to more
conventions than I do now, one, because I've been doing books out of genre, I
don't go a lot, and my research, when I'm researching, takes up a tremendous
amount of time, too, because I'm just, on one hand, I'm arrogant and I like to
control things, but on the other hand, I'm very sensitive and I can always
manage to get offended at somebody says. I was guest of honor at Caracon last
year. I did that one, and I'm going to do Lunacon in March because I really like
that New York ground. Otherwise, I mean, my writing schedule is very heavy. I
just turned in a book. I just started a book, which is doing just about the
amount of time I have to finish it. I don't have a lot of extra time to do more
than the work that I'm doing. I'm real conscientious on my homework. A lot of
times, you can never know enough about the subjects that you're writing about.
When you're creating Whole World, you find there's something that you need to
know that you haven't. Physics alone will not get you through science fiction,
novel, nor will any other specialty, not biology. There's no single thing you
can do that's going to allow you to create an entire culture and change it. It's
not just creating the culture. You've got to be able to create it and change it.
So the homework really takes a tremendous amount of effort. And it's nice to do
a fantasy book now almost as a break or a paid vacation, because that homework I
did years ago, and I remember all the things I need to know to do that. I think
I have like three books on my desk. Heracles, Cosmetic Fragments, one on Asian
fighting styles and a classical dictionary from Oxford. And that is all I need
rather than, you know, three shelves and a stool and a pile on the floor of
stuff that I have to be able to refer to all the time. So cons, the kind of
feedback you get at cons isn't as good as, I get feedback through letters um i
don't trust reviewers because when my first book came out aj buddry's reviewed
me twice on the same book and two different publications it gave me two totally
opposite reviews so i learned my lesson early um but sales figures and letters
are really the way and also you know there are readers around here i do some you
know i do book signings and i do small things where i can control it a little
better than i can it's a real big i mean i'll do a world con or um i went to
england for c con i do one or two a year but it's really all the time that i
want to give it um it takes me about a week it's a different person that has to
go to a con my writer is too open so i had to create this other person my author
and the author goes to the cons and it takes me about a week to get rid of this
author afterwards because when you sit at that typewriter there's no room for
you the writer you have to erase yourself so that the characters can be there
and the story can come and if I'm self-conscious or somebody has said something
to me about there being too much science or not enough science or that my books
are fantasies to get really obsessed with those fantasy labels um I'm liable to
take it too much to heart and to react to it on paper and do something to my
story which I don't want to happen because it's something that's happened I just
got a real good review in the New York Daily News And I hate the good ones as
much as I hate the bad ones. They never like them for the right reasons. So the
best thing really is just the letters from people who read them three times and
loved them or who asked me intelligent questions, which I try to answer. And
other writers, I get sometimes good feedback, especially in the Sanctuary
Project where we're all working with the same train and thought. And everybody
switches material before it gets turned in. I get good feedback from those
people. but in the end I've got to be happy with it if I'm not happy I hold a
book a couple months before I turn it in and you have a gut feeling if you've
left something out or you've screwed up The Earth Dreams was the only time I
ever knew that I pleased myself and I wondered whether I was going to please
other people the only book that I really took it to an extreme that I think is
important to do and valuable in the long term but which may not suit everybody
in the short term
Okay, one of the central themes in the first two carrion books especially was
Shebat's problem with her magic versus carrion science. And that seems to
hearken back to what you said earlier about your experience as being a logical
person who was having problems with precog and ESP. It's very annoying to have
dreams that come true. My specialty is car dreams. If there's going to be
something wrong with my car, I have a dream about it. Two flat tires on the road
to Chicago in the rain, right? I wake up and we buy two tires and the other two
go flat. I had a nice one where I woke my husband up in the middle of the night,
said Brand Auto Supply, and went back to sleep. It turned out that the only
place in New York City you could get a flat fixed on Sunday at that point in
time was Brand Auto Supply. We found out two weeks later. This makes no sense to
me. I don't like it that these things happen. I have gone to great lengths to
find good logical explanation for something that doesn't make any sense without
a lot of === . If, indeed, consciousness is the only thing that moves and
everything else is fixed, then I'm just getting information from other parts of
what is, in essence, one large feature which, in my sleep, are available to me.
That's one way to look at it. Another way to look at it is just to step forward
and backward arrow and you're bouncing around. But whatever it is, there's more
going on in the space-time universe than we have been able to quantify
mathematically, and there's absolutely no doubt about it.
There's been some talk about experiments that seem to prove the breakdown of
Einstein's separability. If there's more work to back that up, then that would
be very helpful for me in my personal quandary with these things. But it does
exist as an insoluble problem right now. So I tend to keep tackling it. And
tackling it with Shebat, who is really an ignorant child who took on a veneer
of civilization but remained very primitive throughout, was a nice way to tackle
it in the face of all the heavy abstract stuff. I mean, here's this character
who is willing to admit that she doesn't understand the physics or the space
-time manifolds, and if she turns on the cruiser and it goes, it's the same
thing as, you know, I mean, a woman can't change a tire, doesn't know how her
engine works, but she can drive. I needed that character and the magic, really,
to balance off the
space-time navigation stuff and the temporal stuff that was going on toward the
end of the book.
Okay. Unfortunately, I haven't written which book this quote came from, but I
have a little short quote I want to read to you from that and get your comment
on it. This is talking about Shebat, and it says, She agreed with the Kerrion
position that fiction and fantasy were acid eating away at the substructure of
society, that these could foster nothing but discontent in malaise. And then the
paragraph goes on to say that basically the computers drove away music and
poetry. So here we have the two sides conflicting. Have you resolved that
conflict is really true? I never had the conflict. That's a little joke. I have
an element of sarcastic humor. It's something that I gave the culture. I really
don't have any problem personally with that, but I think that some people do. So
when I see something like that, I will take it to an extreme and put it in. And
to me, it's just a form. I mean, that's in the same part. I guess that's in
Dream Dancer, and it's right along there with the guy who went in the huge
Pentagon-type building and has been there for 150 years and never came out, and
I kept seeing him. Right, right. So those are all the, in a sense, those are to
be taken not too seriously. One gets playful every once in a while. But at the
time, I was a little concerned with the degree at which editors in the field of
which there are too few, right, tended to want to control what the writers were
doing. I mean, somebody had asked me for an idea of what was going to go on in
the rest of the books, And I wasn't about to give it to them because I don't
think you should write. Homer said the same thing. You shouldn't write the same
book. You shouldn't tell the same story twice. And I want my first draft to be
for everybody rather than having to write it once for the editor and write it
again for the public. As I said before, you run a risk there of leaving
something out because you've already said it. I do believe in the freshness of
the first draft. And although I clean my draft up and do in essence a second
draft when I retype I try to keep as much as the original whatever is good I
keep we have a problem for the artist in this society and it's engendered by the
people who are the middlemen who take your art and purvey it to a public whom
they do not respect it's in the sales managers and the art directors and
sometimes in the editors if you have a good one you don't feel it. I have a very
good one right now and I'm very comfortable. As long as I know writing for this
particular editor that if I meet my own standards this editor is going to love
it and not going to give me any problem about it because it's an intelligent
editor with a good understanding of science and a willingness to admit that he
doesn't know when he doesn't know. I had an editor at one point that stood up
for all the little fists, and space turned red and said, well, I never took high
school science, and I don't understand it, and I don't think anybody else will
either. Somebody like that should not be editing science fiction. They should be
editing ladies' romances. They really don't belong in this kind of field. I
mean, I'm very protective of the right of someone who does this kind of work to
experiment and to take shots. It really is the only free area where you can do
it. Avant-garde is not a viable commercial area. in science fiction, because its
middle list is. And so you can please the publisher and also please yourself
write something that has some validity that will get people to think. It's
really important that people think for themselves. I mean, here we have an open
free society, the only one in the world in which the information that you're
allowed to have is limited pretty much by your ability to collect information
and nothing else. I mean, I had that particle deemed stuff before it was
declassified. You can get it if you really want it. Or you can get enough to
know what's going on. There's some stuff that right now I imagine is pretty
highly classified about an EMP defensive weapon. But if you know what EMP is and
you know what it does, then you know what they're working on. We have this right
to ask questions, to know and understand, to get the information here. We don't
have it anywhere else. And yet we're subjected to a sort of censorship by
mediocrity and I don't like that I think that the value really of our literature
is to give information to move these people to get them thinking and we get all
these a lot of science fictions read by kids in high school great kids like I
was who haven't decided what they want to do yet if I can move three or four
kids to try and find the answers to those questions and those kids go into
technical fields and do something interesting then I've done something that I
consider important so in that way I mean I was angry but when I'm angry I make a
little joke because I can't be crusader rabbit and I'm not going to change the
world and all I can do is change the world that I make so I make a world and I
have it have good things and bad things about it and I run the characters
through it and let them be human in it and hopefully we all learn something I
mean they surprise me every once in a while they come out a little better or a
little worse than I thought that they were alright Right. With regard to that
two cultures thing, it's been my experience that scientists have a lot less
trouble with the two cultures than people in the humanities. I mean, I know a
lot of scientists, me included, are very interested in philosophy and things
like that. And I don't find a lot of humanities people who are that interested
in science or care and are very antagonistic. And that's always puzzled me,
which is why I wanted to ask you about that, because I thought it might be a
little bit of a humorous dig. Yeah. That bothers me. I get that, too, because
there are a lot of so-called literary writers in science fiction, You know,
enough of them so that I have had run-ins with people who are writing science
fiction for reasons that I don't, you know, just to make social comments or just
to allow themselves literary freedom. Stuff that seems to me totally valueless.
And they come down on me very hard because in a sense they're threatened by the
kind of work that I'm doing. They don't want to do that work. I think people
with a strong technical background and who are comfortable with math and with
the physical world, you can't understand the world if you don't understand
physics. And to say that to someone is in itself upsetting. And you've got a lot
of people who grew up and got liberal arts degrees and they're finding that it's
not helping them with the real world, and they're hostile. There are, there's a
technological backlash, which you must be aware of. And they want us, if we're
going to be technologically literate, to stay out of their world. They don't
want to hear about it. They want everybody who is comfortable with technology to
have a very large head, very thick glasses, and stay in their world and press a
computer. They don't want them out in the world. because they feel that the
world is their place and the sensibilities and the humanities that they are
concerned with are somehow threatened by computers because they don't understand
them, because mathematics, because they've never learned it, by anything. It's
just the typical resistance to new things that people have. I hesitate to name
writers, but there are people that have good style that are writing science
fiction who are not writing science fiction. They just happen to be writing and
selling stuff as science fiction so that they can take advantage of the freedom
without doing what I consider paying your dues. They don't know what they're
talking about. They really do not, and they don't belong between cutters that
say science fiction on them. I'm like on the obverse camp. I'm from the
technical side saying, why aren't these people doing any homework? Why don't
they even attempt to understand the world? We can't understand philosophy. At
this point in time, if you don't get into the mathematical philosophers, that's
where it is. Geocrinometry is philosophy, man. The philosophical questions in
space and time are the questions in philosophy at this moment. I mean, even 20
years ago, with Grinbaum and Wittrow and those guys, that was the leading edge.
And so you get these people who are in the so-called humanities who are trying
to live in the late 19th century now. and eventually they're not going to be
able to make a living doing that. You cannot exclude what is the most power of a
society and still claim to be speaking for that society. You really got me going
now, I'm going to stop. Great, no? It's going to get me into a lot of trouble.
Remember, we edit, so we won't get you in trouble. My little lecture. Another
thing I felt to be an inside joke, which I thoroughly enjoyed, maybe it wasn't a
joke, but Raphael Penrose, who was a descendant of the well-known Roger Penrose,
complete with this watch that got passed down. Is that factual? And do you know
Penrose? I don't know him personally. He's my favorite of all the guys working
in that area. I love Twister's theory. He makes all the sense to me in the
world. And I have read, sedulously, everything he has written. And the thing
about the watch actually came from, God, what is it? It's a Symposium on General
Relativity, I think Cambridge published it, in which he had a paper talking
about particularly his watch. So I thought it would be a lot of fun to take his
watch, but I was betting on him. I sat down and I said, okay, now who is going
to be, in 250 years, one guy that's alive today and working now is going to be
still valid and important to that society, and he's my guest. I think that
Twister theory has a good chance of proving to be 80
% valid. I really like the fact that Twisters have to spin before they have
anything else. It's a very complicated... If you're familiar with the concept,
you know what I'm talking about. Right. If not, this is no place to give you a
short course on Roger Penrose. Yeah, I'm very interested in him as well and have
enjoyed that theory, although I haven't seen much on it in the last year or so.
Right. Well, I think this is a couple of years old. Well, they haven't been –
they got the basics down. And I talked to somebody who is a mediocre physicist
and also a science fiction writer who said an interesting thing to me, which was
that – I asked him what he thought of it when he talked about it. While he said,
well, you know, if he's right, then we don't have anything left to do and we're
all out of jobs. So part of the resistance to the kind of stuff he's publishing
stems from the fact that it just might be that that structure is indeed a bottom
-line structure. And he's running into the sort of resistance within the
community that everybody runs into if they have an actual good idea, God forbid.
So there's a sort of self-censorship within those guys, too. But you're right, I
haven't seen anything in the last year from him. It doesn't mean that the
structure and what's going on there is any less valid. I could make you a zerox
of the article I have from the Centennial Symposium. If you don't have that,
you'd probably like to see it. Sure, if it's no problem, I'll talk to you about
it at the end, which, by the way, will come eventually, don't? I don't have that
many more questions. If you're still game, I am. I'm fine. Okay. Shebat referred
to the universe in one of the books as an amenable universe, which I guess is
another name for participatory or anthropomorphic, basically the same
philosophical principle as the one in Silistra. Right. Okay. A little more. It
was a little more quantum mechanical this time, I think, than last time. and
certainly a little more sophisticated, but basically the same kind of structure.
And the amenable universe was fun that is. Again, you know, if indeed they're
giving us everything that we think about, if one is a co-creator, then as long
as we keep delving into smaller and smaller degrees of particle physics, we will
keep finding what we look for. But if twisters are what twisters are, then we
found a bottom line.
Now we're going to get into a kind of philosophical question and both of the
series have female protagonists and they are fully capable individuals and yet
they're not... I don't think they would make somebody who would be, let's say, a
stereotypical feminist happy. I definitely don't. Okay, do you get feedback from
that? This seems to me realistic. It is post-liberation and that's why I enjoyed
it. But do you get problems with people who maybe get a little PO'd because
estuary gets beaten up. And you point out that males and females may actually
have different mathematical abilities and different intuitive abilities. Well, I
have just, you must have seen those studies on why women don't do well at math
and pick up math. Right. Because I'm not making this stuff up. I have a nice
degree of facility in math, and I also improve it spatially. You know, I shoot
well, and my pinball's right up there. One can develop these things. It may not
be a genetic thing. It might be a conditioning thing. I can't say a lot. Other
people are working on it, but it is a reality. As far as the rest of it, it's a
problem for females in the age that is coming if indeed it continues to be the
case because without good technical facility, good math willingness to deal with
computers, they're going to be dinosaurs. And the same instrument, one can be
equal at a computer if one masters the computer. There's a potential for real
equality, an intellectual equality, now that has never existed before, partly
because menial labor and physical strength is no longer a great part of what
makes one a functional human being in a society, and partly because of the
concerns of the society itself. It is not going to happen if women don't start
doing their own work in the areas involved and getting their facility out there.
And if I can do it, the rest of them can do it. There's no reason why anyone
should be in a self-inflicted ghetto.
I'd really like to see ladies spending more time trying to become premier in
their fields. the way a guy has to. I mean, it's a responsibility that one takes
on very early in life. I am going to be successful at something specific besides
childbearing. Not that childbearing isn't a nice part of life, but there
definitely is more, and I find the ERA thing very embarrassing. People assume
that I am a feminist, and I really don't want to be associated with a bunch of
ladies standing out in the middle of the street screaming for their rights. It's
just not me. I'm not comfortable with them. I don't agree with them. I don't
like oversimplification. I don't believe that conditioning is a great part of
what makes a person what they are, or that the fact that if you're a little girl
and you don't have pockets in your pants, you're doomed. I don't believe it. A
great degree of it is genetic inheritance, but one does have control over one's
own fate. Intelligence will go where you point it. And there are plenty of
intelligent women out there. I'd like to see them do something with that
intelligence. In a sense, I suppose I was throwing the gauntlet, but at times it
annoys me. I've ended up on panels before I knew better at conventions where I
look around me and everyone else in that panel is a woman and someone has put me
in a ghetto. And invariably they all write fantasy or they all write very light
science fiction. And nobody is writing the sort of thing that I'm writing, and
nobody is interested in talking about what I'm interested in talking about. I
was at one where the moderator said, oh, isn't this wonderful? We're all ladies.
We'll have a consciousness-raising session. And I just about slid under the
table. It's just not my style. It's not what I'm interested in. It's not what
I'm comfortable with. And I don't even mind if large groups of females want to
organize for their rights, although the Constitution does not guarantee any
right except the right to struggle to succeed. Nobody's given you the right to
have anything gratis in America just to try to get it. But they're not speaking
for me. And I'm sure they're not speaking for a large number of perfectly
competent, happy females who are doing what they're doing and have a specific
goal, which is not political, i.e. to work in the field, to do good work, to
create a corpus or body of intellectual work or technical work or any other kind
of work that is satisfying. These characters, Estri in a positive way and
Shebat almost in a negative way, do their best to succeed at something.
Shebat, because she's unfocused, has more of the problems of current-day
females than Estri, actually. Estri had more difficult situations to deal with,
but a much simpler society, really, to deal with it in. And Shebat, in the end,
opted for what I considered the best option for her, which was her cursor and
study and growing as a person, which, for me, was what was necessary for that
character to have. And I got letters from people that said that they cried at
the end. I didn't think it was sad. I thought it was a good idea that she went
off with her cruiser, which is what, indeed, a pilot is supposed to do,
regardless of sex. And I was very surprised to get a letter like that from a
reasonably intelligent person who I actually knew. I mean, I knew it wasn't just
a letter from a strange fan. It was a letter from a person I had met because the
reader had put so much of her own values into the story, the ending was a
different experience for her than it was for me to write her. That doesn't
usually happen. Usually they get what I want them to get. And in this case, the
values of the person reading it were so different from the values of the
character that it made the reader cry. And although I don't think that's bad, it
doesn't mean that I failed as a writer, I think it says something about the
reader. You're going to get a certain number of readers That way I've had
problems with ultra-feminist readers at conventions in minor ways in the
beginning, but mostly from the guys. The women wouldn't read it originally
because of the covers and because of the subject matter. I'm not going to get
it. It's other women writers. I mean, the obvious ones are going to say things
to you, the gay ones, the ones who are very small and kind of mousy. and really
don't have any background in male-female relations to speak of will have the
reactions that those kinds of people will have when confronted with a book like
that. But the reactions that surprised me were the ones from guys who would kind
of give me a snicker and try to pat my butt and that sort of thing. So it's a
problem right now, but I don't think most people that I know have no problems
within their own sexuality. They just are concerned with the world's sexuality.
And as long as each two people, each group of two people get it together, then
the world will take care of itself and we in general will continue as a race.
But because of my familiarity with politics, I'm very aware of how many people
find it possible to make a living in this or that non-profit organization doing
virtually nothing but talking. And there's a great deal of that in the women's
movement. okay here here i like that um okay i've got two more questions we're